drafts/humans-driving-global-warming.md, before:

---
layout: draft
title: 'Is there "99.999% certainty humans are driving global warmning"?'
---
([Spoiler alert](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betteridge%27s_law_of_headlines): no. But it's not as bad as I would have guessed.)

I'm definitely not a climate scientist. I think I'm more skeptical than most of my peers about AGW, for reasons that have nothing to do with thinking that I understand climate science, and which aren't relevant here.

But I do know something about statistics, and when [reddit tells me](http://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2ff60m/new_study_concludes_that_there_is_99999_certainty/) that a new study shows [99.999% certainty that humans are driving global warming](http://theconversation.com/99-999-certainty-humans-are-driving-global-warming-new-study-29911), my potential-bullshit detector goes PING-PING-PING.

PING! My impression of the general quality of science reporting is somewhere between "atrocious" and "depressing", so I think there's a good chance that the article is misrepresenting the study.

PING! And I remember that a lot of scientists are not statisticians, and that there's a good chance they made a mistake in the paper.

PING! Something else I think of is the notion of [confidence levels inside and outside an argument](http://lesswrong.com/lw/3be/confidence_levels_inside_and_outside_an_argument/). Even if the study does make the 99.999% claim, and it contains no internal mathematical or statistical errors, it might not be using a model that corresponds to reality. And even if it's not obvious how the model might differ from reality, we need to consider the possibility that there is a problem we don't see, and adjust our probability estimates accordingly. (The boundary between this PING and the previous PING is not necessarily well-defined.)

So here are three potential ways in which the claim might be bullshit. They seem pretty exhaustive. Either the premises are wrong - or the inferences are wrong - or the reporting misrepresents the conclusion - or the reporting is correct.

So let's take them one at a time.

### Bad reporting?

I'm surprised to discover that the linked article was actually written by the authors of the paper. That's a good sign. But reading closely, "driving" is an exaggeration.

The article contains this passage:

> The 2013 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report provided an expert consensus that:

> > It is extremely likely [defined as 95-100% certainty] that more than half of the observed increase in global average surface temperature from 1951 to 2010 was caused by the anthropogenic [human-caused] increase in greenhouse gas concentrations and other anthropogenic forcings together.

The latter quote can fairly be read as, "it is extremely likely that humans are driving global warming". But that conclusion comes from an expert consensus, not the paper being reported on. When the authors talk about their own paper, they use weaker phrasing:

> global average temperature over the past 60 years would [not] have been as high without human-caused greenhouse gas emissions

and

> objective assessment linking global temperature increases to human activity

and

> humans are contributing to significant changes in our climate

*Contributing* and *driving* are very different. This is a small, but fairly forgivable, amount of bullshit.

### Bad science?

It turns out that the [actual paper](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096314000163) is open-access. That's awesome! And it's only twelve pages long, with lots of tables and pretty graphs (and a few ugly graphs).

I said above that I know something about statistics. I do not know enough about statistics to sensibly evaluate this paper, but I can make a few comments.

The authors describe their method thus:

> We developed a statistical model that related global temperature to various well-known drivers of temperature variation, including El Niño, solar radiation, volcanic aerosols and greenhouse gas concentrations. We tested it to make sure it worked on the historical record and then re-ran it with and without the human influence of greenhouse gas emissions.

More precisely, their model is the sum of a linear regression and an [autoregressive moving-average model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive%E2%80%93moving-average_model). I haven't encountered ARMA models before, but it looks like the factors taken into account are:

1. The factors listed above:
    - **f(eCO<sub>2</sub>)** (equivalent carbon dioxide) combines greenhouse gasses, aerosols and particulates into a single number. I guess this number is meant to be something like, "if we removed all the greenhouse gases and stuff and replaced them with this amount of CO<sub>2</sub>, then [[some relevant factor like the amount of heat sent back to Earth by the atmosphere]] would be conserved". *f* is a logarithmic function, because apparently that's what the relationship in question looks like.
    - **SOI** (southern oscillation index) is [this thing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Ni%C3%B1o_Southern_Oscillation).
    - **TSI** (total solar irradiance) measures how much sunlight the Earth's atmosphere receives.
    - **VOLRF** (volcanic stratospheric aerosol radiative forcing) measures the effect on global temperature from the stuff released by volcanic activity.
2. White noise, uncorrelated month-on-month.
3. The white noise from (2) that went into the calculations 1, 2, 12 and 24 months ago. (But not the additional white noise from (3) that went into those calculations.) (This is the moving-average part of the ARMA model.)
4. The factors (2), (3) and (4) that went into the previous month. (This is the autoregressive part of the ARMA model.)

I have no reason to think this is a bad model, and the authors spend some time justifying it. I don't feel particularly capable of evaluating their arguments.

Having developed the model, their approach is as follows: they run a simulation of the model over the time period (1882-2010), and count the largest number of consecutive months where temperature exceeds the mean 20th century average for that month. (I'm not sure whether they're comparing to actual 20th century averages, or simulated ones.) They also count the number of ten-year windows during which temperatures fell.

Then they do the same thing again, but removing the effects of eCO<sub>2</sub>. They do that by simply setting the regression parameter to zero.

They do both of these things lots of times, and compare the results. They find that with eCO<sub>2</sub> removed, there are far fewer consecutive hot months, and far more ten-year cooling periods.

Before I go into any depth on the results, some extra details that probably don't matter too much. Firstly, when they run a simulation of the model, they actually run two simulations. The first simulation is used to generate new parameter estimates, and those estimates are used to run the second simulation, which temperatures are taken from. I assume, but I'm not actually sure, that the new estimates are generated in the same way as the original ones, just using different data.

Secondly, they actually use two different sets of paramater estimates. One ("model B") was generated from the whole time series, the other ("model E") was generated from just the data from 1950 onwards. The parameters used in the models are identical, and the *values* of the parameters are very similar.

Thirdly, they actually use *three* different sets of parameter estimates. "Model F" uses almost the same parameters as models B and E, but it doesn't include a term for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) and it was only trained on the data for 1882-1949. This gets very similar results as when you set that term to zero in models B and E, which is used to justify doing that.

So, the results:

> The chance of observing 304 consecutive months or more with temperature exceeding the 20th century average for the corresponding month is approximately 24.9 percent when eCO<sub>2</sub> forcing is included in Model B and 52.9 percent in Model E (Fig. 7a). When eCO<sub>2</sub> forcing is excluded from the simulations the probability of this occurring is less than 0.001 percent for both Models B and E. Under the scenario that climate like that observed from 1882 to 1949 had continued to 2010 (Model F, Table 3), the chance of observing the anomalous temperature event is also very small; only about 0.04 percent.

from which they conclude

> The results of our statistical analysis would suggest that it is highly likely (99.999 percent) that the 304 consecutive months of anomalously warm global temperatures to June 2010 is directly attributable to the accumulation of global greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

*pingpingpingpingpingpingping*

You can't do this!

Okay, numerically it isn't totally awful, but this is an example of "getting a not-totally-wrong answer by a totally-wrong method".

Bayes 101:

    $$ { P(H_0|O) \over P(H_1|O) }
           = { P(H_0) \over P(H_1) } \cdot { P(O|H_0) \over P(O|H_1) } $$

One way that we might instantiate this formula is: `$H_0$` represents model B, and `$H_1$` represents model $B$ with the f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) parameter set to 0. (`$P(H_0)$` and `$P(H_1)$` represent how likely we think it is that these models accurately represent the real world.) $O$ is the observation of 304 or more consecutive warm months.

The conclusion appears to read: "`$P(O|H_1) < 10^{-5}$`, therefore `$P(H_0|O) > 1 - 10^{-5}$`". (At least, I assume this is the reasoning for the 99.999 percent figure, since they don't actually explain it.) This is not a valid inference.

What we actually get from the data is the Bayes factor,

    $$ { P(O|H_0) \over P(O|H_1) }, $$

where `$P(O|H_1)$` is "less than 0.001 percent" - I'm going to be unfair and round it to *exactly* 0.001 percent, or $0.00001$. (Hey, if it was much less than that, they would have picked a lower number to say it was less than.) And `$P(O|H_0)$` is "approximately 24.9 percent", or $0.249$. Then the Bayes factor comes out at $24900$.

If we assume that `$H_0$` and `$H_1$` are exhaustive and mutually exclusive (i.e. precisely one of them is true), then after a small amount of arithmetic we finish with

    $$ P(H_0|O) = { 24900 \over 24901 } \approx 0.99996 $$

in other words, using the numbers from the article, and doing slightly better math, **there is only 99.996 percent certainty that humans are driving global warming**. In your *face*, scientists!

Okay, yeah. Like I said, the actual conclusion wasn't totally wrong, but the method was.

(If instead of model B, we choose model E, then we get 99.998% certainty.)


---

(Notes that might enter the finished version in some form.)

What problems might there be?

One thing that seems a little sketchy is that data for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) is only available yearly, but the simulation is run monthly. Monthly values were obatined by linear interpolation - which I interpret to mean something like, if f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) was 0 in 1910 and 12 in 1911, then they model it as being 0 in July 1910, 1 in August 1910, ..., 11 in June 1911, and 12 in July 1911. Given that f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) is basically

Commit message:

Editing dead post.
I've kind of given up on writing this post, but I did some edits that
I never commited and now they're just hanging around being annoying,
and I don't want to lose them.

drafts/humans-driving-global-warming.md, after:

---
layout: draft
title: 'Is there "99.999% certainty humans are driving global warmning"?'
---
([Spoiler alert](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betteridge%27s_law_of_headlines): no. But it's not as bad as I would have guessed.)

I'm definitely not a climate scientist. I think I'm more skeptical than most of my peers about AGW, for reasons that have nothing to do with thinking that I understand climate science, and which aren't relevant here.

But I do know something about statistics, and when [reddit tells me](http://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/2ff60m/new_study_concludes_that_there_is_99999_certainty/) that a new study shows [99.999% certainty that humans are driving global warming](http://theconversation.com/99-999-certainty-humans-are-driving-global-warming-new-study-29911), my potential-bullshit detector goes PING-PING-PING.

PING! My impression of the general quality of science reporting is somewhere between "atrocious" and "depressing", so I think there's a good chance that the article is misrepresenting the study.

PING! And I remember that a lot of scientists are not statisticians, and that there's a good chance they made a mistake in the paper.

PING! Something else I think of is the notion of [confidence levels inside and outside an argument](http://lesswrong.com/lw/3be/confidence_levels_inside_and_outside_an_argument/). Even if the study does make the 99.999% claim, and it contains no internal mathematical or statistical errors, it might not be using a model that corresponds to reality. And even if it's not obvious how the model might differ from reality, we need to consider the possibility that there is a problem we don't see, and adjust our probability estimates accordingly. (The boundary between this PING and the previous PING is not necessarily well-defined.)

So here are three potential ways in which the claim might be bullshit. They seem pretty exhaustive. Either the premises are wrong - or the inferences are wrong - or the reporting misrepresents the conclusion - or the reporting is correct.

So let's take them one at a time.

### Bad reporting?

I'm surprised to discover that the linked article was actually written by the authors of the paper. That's a good sign. But reading closely, "driving" is an exaggeration.

The article contains this passage:

> The 2013 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report provided an expert consensus that:

> > It is extremely likely [defined as 95-100% certainty] that more than half of the observed increase in global average surface temperature from 1951 to 2010 was caused by the anthropogenic [human-caused] increase in greenhouse gas concentrations and other anthropogenic forcings together.

The latter quote can fairly be read as, "it is extremely likely that humans are driving global warming". But that conclusion comes from an expert consensus, not the paper being reported on. When the authors talk about their own paper, they use weaker phrasing:

> global average temperature over the past 60 years would [not] have been as high without human-caused greenhouse gas emissions

and

> objective assessment linking global temperature increases to human activity

and

> humans are contributing to significant changes in our climate

*Contributing* and *driving* are very different. This is a small, but fairly forgivable, amount of bullshit.

### Bad statistics?

It turns out that the [actual paper](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212096314000163) is open-access. That's awesome! And it's only twelve pages long, with lots of tables and pretty graphs (and a few ugly graphs) taking up space so that I don't have to read as much.

I said above that I know something about statistics. I do not know enough about statistics to sensibly evaluate this paper, but I can make a few comments.

The authors describe their method thus:

> We developed a statistical model that related global temperature to various well-known drivers of temperature variation, including El Niño, solar radiation, volcanic aerosols and greenhouse gas concentrations. We tested it to make sure it worked on the historical record and then re-ran it with and without the human influence of greenhouse gas emissions.

More precisely, their model is the sum of a linear regression and an [autoregressive moving-average model](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive%E2%80%93moving-average_model). I haven't encountered ARMA models before, but it looks like the factors taken into account are:

1. The factors listed above:
    - **f(eCO<sub>2</sub>)** (equivalent carbon dioxide) combines greenhouse gasses, aerosols and particulates into a single number. I guess this number is meant to be something like, "if we removed all the greenhouse gases and stuff and replaced them with this amount of CO<sub>2</sub>, then [some relevant factor like the amount of heat sent back to Earth by the atmosphere] would be conserved". *f* is a logarithmic function, because apparently that's what the relationship in question looks like.
    - **SOI** (southern oscillation index) is [this thing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Ni%C3%B1o_Southern_Oscillation).
    - **TSI** (total solar irradiance) measures how much sunlight the Earth's atmosphere receives.
    - **VOLRF** (volcanic stratospheric aerosol radiative forcing) measures the effect on global temperature from the stuff released by volcanic activity.
2. White noise, uncorrelated month-on-month.
3. The white noise from (2) that went into the calculations 1, 2, 12 and 24 months ago. (But not the additional white noise from (3) that went into those calculations.) (This is the moving-average part of the ARMA model.)
4. The factors (2), (3) and (4) that went into the previous month. (This is the autoregressive part of the ARMA model.)

I have no reason to think this is a bad model, and the authors spend some time justifying it. I don't feel particularly capable of evaluating their arguments.

Having developed the model, their approach is as follows: they run a simulation of the model over the time period (1882-2010), and count the largest number of consecutive months where temperature exceeds the mean 20th century average for that month. (I'm not sure whether they're comparing to actual 20th century averages, or simulated ones.) They also count the number of ten-year windows during which temperatures fell.

Then they do the same thing again, but removing the effects of eCO<sub>2</sub>. They do that by simply setting the regression parameter to zero.

They do both of these things lots of times, and compare the results. They find that with eCO<sub>2</sub> removed, there are far fewer consecutive hot months, and far more ten-year cooling periods.

Before I go into any depth on the results, some extra details that probably don't matter too much. Firstly, when they run a simulation of the model, they actually run two simulations. The first simulation is used to generate new parameter estimates, and those estimates are used to run the second simulation, which temperatures are taken from. I assume, but I'm not actually sure, that the new estimates are generated in the same way as the original ones, just using different data.

Secondly, they actually use two different sets of paramater estimates. One ("model B") was generated from the whole time series, the other ("model E") was generated from just the data from 1950 onwards. The parameters used in the models are identical, and the *values* of the parameters are very similar.

Thirdly, they actually use *three* different sets of parameter estimates. "Model F" uses almost the same parameters as models B and E, but it doesn't include a term for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) and it was only trained on the data for 1882-1949. This gets very similar results as when you set that term to zero in models B and E, which is used to justify doing that.

So, the results:

> The chance of observing 304 consecutive months or more with temperature exceeding the 20th century average for the corresponding month is approximately 24.9 percent when eCO<sub>2</sub> forcing is included in Model B and 52.9 percent in Model E (Fig. 7a). When eCO<sub>2</sub> forcing is excluded from the simulations the probability of this occurring is less than 0.001 percent for both Models B and E. Under the scenario that climate like that observed from 1882 to 1949 had continued to 2010 (Model F, Table 3), the chance of observing the anomalous temperature event is also very small; only about 0.04 percent.

from which they conclude

> The results of our statistical analysis would suggest that it is highly likely (99.999 percent) that the 304 consecutive months of anomalously warm global temperatures to June 2010 is directly attributable to the accumulation of global greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

*pingpingpingpingpingpingping*

You can't do this!

Okay, numerically it isn't totally awful, but this is an example of "getting a not-totally-wrong answer by a totally-wrong method".

Bayes 101:

    $$ { P(H_0|O) \over P(H_1|O) }
           = { P(H_0) \over P(H_1) } \cdot { P(O|H_0) \over P(O|H_1) } $$

One way that we might instantiate this formula is: `$H_0$` represents model B, and `$H_1$` represents model $B$ with the f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) parameter set to 0. (`$P(H_0)$` and `$P(H_1)$` represent how likely we think it is that these models accurately represent the real world.) $O$ is the observation of 304 or more consecutive warm months.

The conclusion appears to read: "`$P(O|H_1) < 10^{-5}$`, therefore `$P(H_0|O) > 1 - 10^{-5}$`". (At least, I assume this is the reasoning for the 99.999 percent figure, since they don't actually explain it.) This is not a valid inference.

What we actually get from the data is the Bayes factor,

    $$ { P(O|H_0) \over P(O|H_1) }, $$

where `$P(O|H_1)$` is "less than 0.001 percent" - I'm going to be unfair and round it to *exactly* 0.001 percent, or $0.00001$. (Hey, if it was much less than that, they would have picked a lower number to say it was less than.) And `$P(O|H_0)$` is "approximately 24.9 percent", or $0.249$. Then the Bayes factor comes out at $24900$.

If we assume that `$H_0$` and `$H_1$` are exhaustive and mutually exclusive (i.e. precisely one of them is true), then after a small amount of arithmetic we finish with

    $$ P(H_0|O) = { 24900 \over 24901 } \approx 0.99996 $$

in other words, using the numbers from the paper, and doing slightly better math, **there is only 99.996 percent certainty that humans are driving global warming**. In your *face*, scientists!

Okay, yeah. Like I said, the actual conclusion wasn't totally wrong, but the method was. (There actually is a reasonable difference between 99.996% and 99.999% - it's about the same as the difference between 50% and 80%. But I'm not going to split hairs over it.)

And this is looking only at model B. If instead we choose model E, then we get 99.998% certainty. If we use model F... model F already doesn't include a term for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>), so it's not clear what `$H_0$` should be. But the Bayes factor can be at most 2500, and $P(H_0)$ would be at most 99.96%, which is much lower than the other two.

I also haven't touched on the results from the ten-year cooling periods. I haven't looked at them in as much depth, but they look similar to the consecutive-warm-months results, with the same problems.

Note that what I'm doing here isn't *good* statistics. The math should be correct, but reality is far more complicated than any of the hypotheses I've been considering.

### Bad premises?

An earlier paragraph hints at the question of whether their approach is even valid. Model E was generated "to test the similarity of the parameter estimates" of model B. They note that "most parameters changed by only a small amount and are within the 95% confidence intervals of the Model B parameters". And yet model E is twice as likely as model B to simulate 304 warm months in a row. Model F was generated to test the validity of removing f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) from models B and E, but it was *forty* times more likely to do so. What this suggests is: you can't trust these models too far.

The correct amount to trust them isn't zero, either. I don't know how much to trust them. Suppose we think there's a one percent chance that this study is complete rubbish - that the methodology would have arrived at the same results regardless of what reality says. Then at the very least, you have to prefix the results from the study with "there is a 99% chance that...". In this case, "there is a 99% chance that there is a 99.999% chance that humans are driving global warming". These two probabilities combine, the 99% dominates, and you get "there is a 99% chance that humans are driving global warming".

The difference between 99% and 99.999% is massive. It's the difference between something that happens three times a year, and something that happens once every three hundred years.

Of course, the question isn't "is the study total bullshit, or is it correct?" It's more subtle than that. Ideally, we want to answer the question: *what is the probability that a study with this method would have gotten these results, conditional on humans driving global warming? What is the probability, conditional on humans not driving global warming?* And of course, we can't answer that.

But we can make some general observations. There's a decent chance that I'm going to embarrass myself here, not being a climate scientist or a statistician, but I can live with that.

It looks as though the main thing that the models tell us is "global temperature tracks f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) pretty well". Of the nine model parameters, only three exceed 0.1 in either model, which are the parameters for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) (model B 0.38/model E 0.42), the auto-regressive parameter (0.93/0.85), and the one-month moving-average parameter (-0.44/-0.35). This is valuable information, but I don't think it's anything new.

Another takeaway is the ten-year cooling periods. We can't say "99.999% certainty that there would have been more of those if it weren't for humans". But it does give us reason to believe that cooling periods are 

That's valuable information, but it's hardly new.

The models don't seem to be checked against reality very hard. I think thats's what the section "Model diagnostics" (p. 8, and fig. 5) is about, but it's not clear to me exactly what's going on, and it doesn't look very thorough. I think they're mostly saying that when they run a simulation using the full models, the divergences from reality look random (and satisfy some tests for randomness). That's valuable.

---

(Notes that might enter the finished version in some form.)


What problems might there be?

One thing that seems a little sketchy is that data for f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) is only available yearly, but the simulation is run monthly. Monthly values were obatined by linear interpolation - which I interpret to mean something like, if f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) was 0 in 1910 and 12 in 1911, then they model it as being 0 in July 1910, 1 in August 1910, ..., 11 in June 1911, and 12 in July 1911. Given that f(eCO<sub>2</sub>) is basically
